Really, this is a copy of the first printed catalog?
It's the first printed catalog of this library, but there were no predecessors in other libraries.
Really?
It's the first printed catalog.
Dating from 1595?
It's 1595, yes.
Can you give me some sense of how this library developed to this degree of sophistication?
Yes, I could tell you that I don't know if you know the history of this town of Leiden and the place it took in the war between the Netherlands and Spain around 1570.
It was
the Spaniards occupied Leiden this time and the citizens were very brave so the Spaniards couldn't take the city so Prince William of Orange, William the Silent he decided that Leiden as a
token of gratitude, should have the first university in the Netherlands.
Really?
Also, not the Netherlands in the old sense of the Netherlands, including Belgium, because there you have a university which is older, that's Louvain Loeven.
But in the Netherlands as it's now, Leiden is the oldest university.
It's from 1574.
And so it was a gift.
The university was a gift.
The university was a gift from Prince William of Orange because the town had the heroic role of Leiden in that war.
So the university started in 1574, and so it's not easy to say exactly when the university library started.
That's pretty close.
In 20 years they have a catalog.
Yes, it was in the 18s, in the 1580s.
So we had to decide which
Here we should choose for our fourth centenary.
And there were some good reasons to choose 1987 as the year of the foundation of this library.
The 400th anniversary.
That is really amazing, isn't it?
It is.
It's not... It's not the oldest there are universities which are older, but it's not bad.
No, it's pretty impressive.
So, obviously, with the establishment of a university, you had to have books, right?
I mean, books are synonymous with the university, aren't they?
A library.
Yes, yes.
Where did the first collections come from?
They were mainly gifts from...
from professors.
There was also a huge gift, a polyglot Bible, which was donated by Prince William of Orange.
It's one of the first books of this library, the polyglot Bible printed by Plantin in Antwerp.
This, of course, was a very important book, has always been a very important book city.
Yes, it was... Plantain, I don't know, how do you say it in English?
Plantain, the printer of Antwerp.
Yes, he was the printer.
He was the printer, yes, Plantain.
And he lived for some time here in Leiden, in the Netherlands.
There have been other printers, Raffalengius.
Can I just see that?
Is this book a 400th anniversary catalogue?
He had an exhibition.
Oh, really?
Is this something I can purchase, this catalogue?
We are out of... We don't have any.
No, we have.
So that's...
I'm very sorry that I can't give you one.
No, no, I'd love to buy one is what I'd like to do.
There's no chance of doing that.
This looks exactly like the kind of history thing.
Books and manuscripts are from our own collection, so we didn't... They must have this at Harvard where I do it.
I'm sure.
And the Joyer Club, which I belong to in New York,
this is the uh so there are no more of these right i can't take this another uh yes you no maybe we could just i can ask if i 1987 let's ask me something about the printers one of those printers in the
in the beginning, in the beginning time of the university was Franciscus Raffalengius.
He was very famous also in Arabic, printing of Arabic books.
And he made an Arabic type specimen.
And that was that he worked at the Plant... How do you say?
Plantin... But you know him.
He was the very famous printer, Plantinus.
and he worked here for some time.
Later on he went back to Antwerp and there he became very famous.
But Rafa Rengis was of his printing office and this is a catalogue of an exhibition we had here some time ago and I can give you this.
I'm a writer who believes in getting as much material as I can.
I hurt my back carrying my briefcase with all the stuff in it.
But over 400 years, how large are the collections now, roughly, would you say?
We don't know exactly, but we always say that we have about three million views.
Three million?
Three million.
Wow.
But that's not as large as the...
But this is the Library of Congress, which you know.
That's right, I know the Library of Congress is not at Harvard either, but this is a small country.
Yes.
And it's famous for, when we speak about older books and older manuscripts, we have a very famous collection of Latin manuscripts, the Vossius Collection.
which contains many very important Latin manuscripts.
For example, one of the most important manuscripts of Lucretius De Reru Natura is in this library.
A manuscript which is also very important for the text critical edition of this book.
Do you still have the original structure or an early structure, the building?
The building itself, yes.
The first library was in a, at the end of the 16th century, was in a chapel.
No, the first library when it was not yet a library,
was a room in the academic building which you see over there.
That's the building with the tower.
To the right or straight ahead?
To the right hand.
And later on the books went to a chapel in...
And the library was the upper part of that chapel.
It was the two stories on the... In the lower parts, it had a... It was an anatomical... Theatrum anatomical.
It was a place where the corpses were... A morgue, not a morgue, but...
But the professors took the corpses and took the body, the corpses part.
Dissection.
Dissection, yes.
It was in the... An anatomy lab, I guess, is what we would call it.
I don't know.
From that time, from the 17th century, a little bit later on, there's a very famous...
It's an image of the library.
An engraving.
If you are interested in library history... This book intends to be... I think I know the picture.
It's famous.
This was the library at the time.
library from 1593 to 1820 this is also this chapel and this is the engraving that's a very famous it was in in the chapel there uh what's his name anthony hobson used this for the end sheets of his book the great libraries it's famous that's here
Is that building still here?
That's the building I named to.
It's not that building you see there, but it's 50 metres behind there.
Does this physical structure still exist?
No, not exactly.
You can't see it.
The chapel is there, but they have made rooms and small...
small rooms in it, so you can't see the structure.
That's a very famous engraving, yes.
We have a shop here in the library where you could buy a very large... In fact, at Skollcluster, you know, they have the famous
Achimbaldo picture of the librarian that's put together.
Oh, yes.
That's a fruit.
Well, that's the original is there.
I didn't know that.
Oh.
It was war booty, which they don't even know where they got it, but there's the original.
And I bought a poster there.
Because in the dust jacket of my book, we have that picture on the back of it.
So I was very pleased to see that.
So there are more pictures of the... Yes.
And then in the... So this is the history of the library here?
Yes, it was the library, yes.
from Dr. P. C. Molhuysen.
Do you think that was ever translated to him?
No, it's not.
He was keeper of the manuscripts of the library.
M-O-L.
How do you spell his name?
H-U-Y-S-E-M.
It is from, it's history of the university library at Leiden.
It's from 1905.
so then at the end of the 19th century so they extended the building and next to the chapel they built this structure and with these rooms and that's still there no because it
became too small again.
So at the beginning of this century, there was again an extension of the building.
I don't know if I can show you.
And you can see it now, how it is.
No, these are the older.
Let's take a look later.
Oh, these are nice.
These are beautiful.
These are the pictures used, and these are the original pictures you used in the... These are all the pictures you used in the mail.
Yes, yes.
And the...
This is a great book.
You've seen it?
No, but I'm sure I can find it.
It's in English, yes.
That's what I'm looking for.
Leiden University in the 17th Century.
An Exchange of Learning.
And that's Thomas H.
L-U-N-S-I-N-G-H S-C-H E-U-R And this is published by the university, right?
University.
Okay, good.
And it contains an article by
yes uh she writes about the first uh century of the uh this is page 394 393 how many pages until uh four five nine three ninety two to four five nine that's that's that's what i have to get right there first time
and there's also an article about printers and scholars the officina plantiniana that's the that's the that's the printing press okay that's page 388 and that's um do they have a copy of this downstairs you think in the library i can make it then i can zero access i could copy this
I can ask to make copies.
That would be great.
And I'll happily pay whatever the charges are.
Yes, I know that you can have copies of me.
That would be spectacular.
That would save me.
I would ask, also, these two articles about the printers and scholars?
That's what I'm here to find out.
That would be great.
It's also an article about academic relations between Sweden and... Yes.
Excellent.
Thank you.
1983.
And until that time, we inhabited the buildings which we talked about.
So you can...
find the old structure, that we have old books and old manuscripts.
But would it be possible?
Yeah.
And with not much, you don't have to, I hate to, I don't mean to intrude in your schedule.
But what do you want?
Have a look at the building?
A look at the building and some of your collections.
And some of the collections.
Something which you could do in a half an hour.
I don't want me to impose too greatly on your schedule.
I realise this is put together very
It would be nice to show Sebastian the exhibition of art which we have in the downstairs.
They are not books, but it's art about books.
It's very interesting.
I saw it tomorrow.
I haven't seen it before, but it's very interesting.
I didn't look at that yet.
Oh, but it's interesting to see that I... I'm sorry, could you say your name, but do you have a card that I can... I have a card, yes.
The central part, the lending bureau, in which the connection between the sister and the library is made.
Here are given the books to the students, to the scholars, and so this is the central part of this library, and the library is the central part of the total complex of buildings of the university around.
So this is the heart of the university?
Yes, it is the heart of the university.
That was his idea.
The architecture.
Yeah, the architecture.
And there are several things that there you see the old observatory, and it is the cupo which makes the relation with that architecture.
It's beautiful.
What kind of wood is that, out of curiosity?
Wood?
I don't know.
I wonder if it's a duck there.
It's beautiful.
It's a beautiful building.
But you did do a circular...
No.
So you worked closely with the architect, you said?
Yes.
And what kinds of things were you concerned about incorporating in the new building?
I was a specialist for the special departments.
There we go now.
We had separated the Western special departments, so manuscripts, old books, and collection of old maps and atlases of which I'm the curator.
And on the other part are the oriental.
So I can give you a quick idea of our rooms here.
And you can leave your... And the manuscripts consist of how many items?
and go through the special steps.
So this is maps probably.
Spectacular collection of maps.
Yes.
I have a collection collected in the last century.
Oh, my goodness.
By Mr.
It's on my card.
I will give you my card at a moment.
How many maps in this room would you say?
80,000.
And there are 20,000 prints and 1,300 witnesses.
But I can get my card for you.
Thank you.
He died, how do you pronounce his name, in Baudel?
Baudelmeyenhaus.
And he died in 1872 and requeathed his collection to the university.
And what did his collection?
Old maps of prints, topographical prints and addresses.
What was the profession in general?
Publishing.
The most famous publishing house in Leiden in the 18th century, Luchtmans.
Luchtmans was also publisher of the university.
L-U-C-H-T-M-A-N-S.
That's the name of the publishing house.
Yeah.
So he collected maps and atlases?
Yes, he won by accident one of the large, famous siege plans of our 80 years' war.
These are magnificent.
In good condition.
Really?
Look at these, 16, 45.
These are 300 years old.
And they're in space.
extraordinary condition, I think.
Yes, extraordinary condition, yes.
350 years old, I guess.
And he was in the circumstance as director of the publishing house and very bookseller.
He got the most beautiful things for himself.
Yes.
And by accident, he was also
one of the first who was involved with the history of cartography.
And as you see, it's by accident on the table now, an alphabetical apparatus for the literary history of map makers and map engravers.
So he was one of the first who made such a system with all these small annotations, as you see here.
And that's the way he collected his information about map makers and map engravers.
Did he ever write anything about it?
He has written or he published something about it.
He was also the first to publish on that field in the Netherlands.
So, but we have to continue.
Okay, would you just... Perhaps he also, one of the beautiful pieces from his collection, it's Kahn's plan.
A garden plan, a garden plan.
It's beautiful.
Look at that.
Of one of the large palaces of the princes of Nassau, Fonselaarsdijk.
Here is the palace.
And here you see the... The gardens.
The gardens and the woods and the meadows.
I wonder if that garden still exists.
Nothing more.
Oh God.
So it only exists in these plants.
What a pity.
I can't give you any look at that.
That's okay.
That's fine.
This is all a bonus for me.
We have to make the appointment not to come to each other properly.
Doctor, this is... I can show you perhaps some of the famous maps here.
From parchment on Palermo.
How would you rank your map and atlas collection?
How would you rank it?
How would you rank it with other collections?
How do you think it... Oh, the place and other collections.
I think it is the largest collections of old maps in the Netherlands.
And you can compare it as far as the old material.
with the British Library map collection and the Bibliothek National Collection, the Australian National League.
So one of the top four or five in the world, probably.
I think so, yes.
I'm sure in Europe.
Well, if it's one of the best in Europe, it's one of the best in the world.
I mean, that's... So we see here a manuscript map made at the occasion of a disaster of two East Indian men who...
were drawn here in the mouth of the river Scheldt.
You see here the Slieventart and the Anna Catalina.
And 20 years ago, they found on the bottom of the sea the wreckage of the ship.
Just 20 years ago?
Yes, 20 years ago, with the help of this map.
Oh, come on.
This is the treasure map.
This is called the treasure map?
That's a good story.
So what's the name, the actual name of the map, did you call it?
this is i would say yes the sad annotation and picture of this map by reason of the disaster of two indian men flying
Deer, the Flying Deer.
What was the name of the ship?
Yeah, the Flying Deer, and the Anna Catharina.
And the Anna?
Catharine Catharina.
C-A-T-H?
1735.
And how old is this map?
1735 it is.
So with a map that was... Made at the occasion of the disaster of these two Indian men.
Indian ships, right?
Indian ships, yeah, but we call it Indian men.
Indian men?
Yeah.
M-E-M-E-N.
Like men of war?
Were they warpships?
Yes, yes.
We call them men of war, is what we call them.
Was it a collision?
No, it was not a collision, it was a big storm.
And where did they sink?
Where is this area?
At the sand banks, in the mouth of the River Scheld.
This is a part of the province of Sealand.
And it's the entrance this day of the river Scheldt, by which a lot of ships go to Antwerp.
It's in the mouth of the river Scheldt, this Belgium here.
So using this map, they were able to locate the wrecks?
Yes.
It was in this way that they, from the sea, they took a course to the two towers of Bruges.
And when they did that, they determined their position here, and then over this spot where the frequent hat was drawn.
They were able to locate this.
I'm a former naval officer.
I had some training with the medical charge.
Oh, yeah.
But this is the treasure map.
It's called the treasure map.
Was there treasure on board the ships when they found it?
These are all manuscript material, right?
All manuscript material, yes.
Would you say that this collection served as the national collection before there was a national collection?
In 1995 it was the National Library of the Republic.
We have then five universities.
Leiden was the university of the most powerful province of the Republic of the Seven Provinces, Holland.
So Leiden was the university of Holland.
Franeker was the university of Friesland.
because Holland was the most powerful province, Leiden was also the most famous university.
Probably the first, too, wasn't it?
Probably the first, too.
And then I have to show you a picture.
So this was the national collection.
When there was a national library established, you still kept your collections?
None of your collections?
Yes.
And we are aware of that, I think.
that we keep here a cultural heritage of the Netherlands.
This is so important to my new book, you have no idea.
So, I think you have to illustrate it.
Oh, that's the famous picture?
That's the famous picture.
I can give you also a set of these ones.
This is the famous picture.
This is it.
Can I just touch it on the side?
I promise I won't.
This is a good feeling.
And here you see the prospect of Constantinople.
That's a fuel drawn in pen and ink, pen and wash, of 11 and a half meters of Constantinople, drawn in 1559.
And you have that picture?
We have still the original, but only twice a year we show it to a physicist.
So this is the first or the second time?
Yes.
Oh, this is extraordinary.
What a treat.
This has been such a great trip.
You have to imagine, that was on the wall of our grand library during one and a half century, from 1600 to 1750.
It was on the wall.
And every student here...
Every scholar who came in the Lager of Leiden University saw this picture of Constantinople.
So it has a tremendous influence on the iconography of the town.
But it was damaged during... Well, it's 150 years.
It's a long time.
And when was the picture drawn, do we know?
1559.
This is 450 years old, this picture.
Yes, yes.
440 years old.
And for conservation reasons, it has been cut up in 21 sheets.
Notice I'm standing back, so don't worry about my pen.
Can I have the sheet?
There it is.
This is the most left.
What is amazing is that that picture shows up in that engraving over there.
Do we know who did the original map?
The original?
Yes, the name.
Okay, that's fine.
You don't have to go.
Don't go through the whole thing.
Sheet number six with the Hagia Sophia here.
Hagia Sophia.
There it is.
That's really something.
And what is the material this is on here?
Paper.
It's paper.
Apparently a pretty good paper, I would think.
Yeah, I think so.
Was it framed on the wall?
I think so, it was framed on the wall.
But then we bought the large library of Isaac Frosius in 1695.
And then all the space in the library, all the walls were needed for new stacks.
So then it disappeared from our side.
It was still in the catalogs, but no one did exactly where it was.
And people tried to find it back in the last century.
And Mr. Bodelnienhuis was the man who said, look at the stacks of the town hall there.
And there they found it, rolled.
And so it was very damaged.
How long had it been there now?
It went from 1600 to 1750?
I think it was there perhaps one century and a half.
Another 150 years, waiting to be discovered again.
And there it was.
That's a great story.
description of that you will find in the catalog which i will give you the dutch one thank you i'm giving a talk at the groyer club in new york in two weeks and i'm going to give a report on what i've been doing for the last couple of weeks well this is this this will get into my talk yeah yeah this little uh
The largest collections on wood is from the Oriental Manuscript Department.
Look at that.
As you see here, but more I can't show you.
It is not allowed.
No, I understand.
This is a manuscript on wood.
On wood, yes.
Now, it's Oriental.
Oriental.
Who brought these back?
Dutch traders?
I shall give you the name of my colleague.
Basically, what you have here is Dutch material for the most and the large majority of materials.
Or do you collect things from all over the world?
This is a heritage from our old colonial history.
So you collect that too?
Yes, yes.
Especially in the...
in the Oriental manuscript department.
And from the first century, from the first years of our university, there was a special accent on the study of Arabic Oriental manuscripts, and especially the Arabic department was very famous in Europe.
If you want to study Arabic language, you have to go to Leiden.
This is still special collections.
Is that what you call it, special collections?
Yes.
Oh, this is huge, isn't it?
That's the print.
This is special collections collected in the last century of Japanese books.
In the last century, so you've been very accurate.
By von Siebold.
Have you ever heard of the Dutchman von Siebold, who was an official of the Dutch government in Japan?
Yes, okay.
And there he collected a lot of things.
books and maps, but it is a part of the Oriental special collections, and therefore you need my curator, my colleague curator, Oriental.
That's quite an interesting binding, isn't it?
Yeah, yeah.
That's low on the left, and what is the other one?
And that should be one, two, three, four, five, six, yeah, there's a nine volume.
I saw I set a letter to Stockham.
Very important collections of letters of the Dutch scholars.
10,000, I think.
Wow.
10,000.
All the various types of installers, right?
Yes.
We have that reclainville building.
And then, during the centuries, more buildings were added to that old one.
So, it was at the end of the 19th century, no, at the end of the 20th of this century, it was a large agglomeration of very different buildings.
And there was a shortage of space for the books in the 60s, and then we decided to build a new one.
And now, that old building with all these added parts, it was used to buy in Herbaring, Herbaring?
Oh, Herbaring, yes.
And now, in the future, it will be used by the board of the university.
And it is at the main canal here.
I can see that on my way by.
Yes, if you are in front of the old academy building, of which you took a picture, then you have to go over the canal of the bridge, a little bit to the right,
And then you are in front of a large building.
And that is the old library.
And behind that building, you see the old church.
And I can walk out that way as I get my bus to go to the other thing.
Do you have a plan of Leiden?
Do you have a?
No.
No?
OK.
A great university library.
where you formerly served as the repository for the nation in terms of... The nation, and the nation also.
Do you still work closely with the National Library, or is that role largely?
It's a very special situation in the Netherlands.
We didn't have that National Library, only it started 20 years ago.
That's all?
Then it was appointed as National Library.
We had a Royal Library.
It was not the National Library.
So... Well, you had a Royal Library prior to that, though.
Yes.
And now we have to ask you for the key products.
...to the new situation that we had the National Library for the...
The independency of all the large libraries was very great in the Netherlands.
We were not adapted to a national library policy in which
There was one library which has the main responsibility.
So you have that now?
We have that now.
But that's all?
15, 15 years, yes.
That's all.
The 1980s, basically?
Yes, so, 1980.
And before that, you did have a royal library.
We did have a royal library.
I thought that was a royal library.
No, the national library.
And in your view, explain the difference, if you would.
We have had in the Netherlands a university library.
So one of these was the University Library of Leiden.
And next to that we have a big library for the learned world, which has its origin in the libraries of the Princes of Nassau.
That's the Royal Library.
That was the Royal Library.
So that was an independent library organization.
The users of that library were people in the Hague and around the Hague and also from all over the Netherlands and also from all over the world.
But it hasn't at that moment a special responsibility for the total library organization.
This is not special collections.
Yes.
Wow, this is beautiful.
When did this building open?
In 1983.
It looks more recent than that.
It's already almost 15 years old.
1983.
Beautiful.
You can go downstairs, but I think it's the same idea.
As you see, on that side, on this side, the north and south hall, and a central hall for a lending bureau, and with two elevators.
You open largely to students and scholars.
Yes.
But you allow other people to come and use your special colleges.
mainly for the scholars in Leiden and the students in Leiden, and next to that for the scholars in the Netherlands and international, especially in the special departments.
We have a lot of visitors on the board.
Excellent.
The books are also here.
That's why I asked for special collections.
It looks like special collections, doesn't it?
Everything here is restricted access, however.
Yes, all is restricted.
Actually, we have one part of this text that's open for browsing, and there we find a lot of journals.
But everything has to be called for.
Yes, everything here, everything has to be called for.
And then these books were transported when one of the old books are asked for, called for, then it is transported to the special department upstairs.
Yes, which I saw.
Our book elevator, and how quickly do they... You can have a look at that.
Five minutes?
How many students here at Leiden, approximately?
At this moment, I think we have 18,000.
That's a good size.
But as you see here, students are ready to be brought to the special department alone.
and is also part of the presentation.
Beautifully designed.
You can see the architect had done a lot of work with libraries.
Also, working this text more attractive with these colors and to make use of these materials.
Beautiful.
It looks like it was made with the help of librarians.
What was the architect's name, do you remember?
from Castile.
Is he Dutch?
Yes, he's Dutch.
He died six years ago.